Add Intro page of TCD (#7259)
huggingface/diffusers: docs/source/en/using-diffusers/inference_with_tcd_lora.md

<!--Copyright 2024 The HuggingFace Team. All rights reserved.

Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the "License"); you may not use this file except in compliance with
the License. You may obtain a copy of the License at

http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0

Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software distributed under the License is distributed on
an "AS IS" BASIS, WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied. See the License for the
specific language governing permissions and limitations under the License.
-->

[[open-in-colab]]

# Performing inference with TCD-LoRA

Trajecotroy Consistency Distillation (TCD) enables the model to generate higher quality, more detailed images with fewer steps. Additionally, TCD demonstrates superior performance even under conditions of high NFEs.

From the [Official Project Page](https://mhh0318.github.io/tcd/), the major merit of TCD can be outlined as follows:

> > ***Better than Teacher:*** TCD maintains superior generative quality at both low NFEs and high NFEs, even exceeding the performance of DPM-Solver++(2S) with origin SDXL. It is worth noting that there is no additional discriminator or LPIPS supervision included during training.

Reviewer: The reader doesn't yet know what NFE is. Also, it's worth hyperlinking DPM-Solver++(2S).

> > ***Better than Teacher:*** TCD maintains superior generative quality at both low NFEs and high NFEs, even exceeding the performance of DPM-Solver++(2S) with origin SDXL. It is worth noting that there is no additional discriminator or LPIPS supervision included during training.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> ***Better than Teacher:*** TCD maintains superior generative quality at both low NFEs and high NFEs, even exceeding the performance of DPM-Solver++(2S) with Stable Diffusion XL (SDXL). It is worth noting that no additional discriminator or LPIPS supervision is included during training.
```

> ***Flexible NFEs:*** The NFEs for TCD sampling can be varied at will without adversely affecting the quality of the results.

> > ***Freely Change the Detailing:*** During inference, the level of detail in the image can be simply modified by adjusing one hyper-parameter gamma. This option does not require the introduction of any additional parameters.

Reviewer: (nit): Could we maybe make these bullet points?

For more technical details of TCD, please refer to [the paper](https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.19159).

> Trajectory consistency distillation can directly place on top of a pre-trained diffusion model as a LoRA module. Such LoRA can be identified as a versatile acceleration module applicable to different fine-tuned models or LoRAs sharing the same base model without the need for additional training.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Trajectory consistency distillation can be directly placed on top of a pre-trained diffusion model as a [LoRA](https://huggingface.co/docs/diffusers/main/en/training/lora) module. Such a LoRA can be identified as a versatile acceleration module applicable to different fine-tuned models or LoRAs sharing the same base model without the need for additional training.
```

TCD-LoRAs are available for [stable-diffusion-v1-5](https://huggingface.co/runwayml/stable-diffusion-v1-5), [stable-diffusion-2-1-base](https://huggingface.co/stabilityai/stable-diffusion-2-1-base), and [stable-diffusion-xl-base-1.0](https://huggingface.co/stabilityai/stable-diffusion-xl-base-1.0). 

> The corresponding checkpoints can be found at [TCD-SD15](https://huggingface.co/h1t/TCD-SD15-LoRA), [TCD-SD21-base](https://huggingface.co/h1t/TCD-SD21-base-LoRA) and [TCD-SDXL](https://huggingface.co/h1t/TCD-SDXL-LoRA), separately.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The corresponding checkpoints can be found at [TCD-SD15](https://huggingface.co/h1t/TCD-SD15-LoRA), [TCD-SD21-base](https://huggingface.co/h1t/TCD-SD21-base-LoRA), and [TCD-SDXL](https://huggingface.co/h1t/TCD-SDXL-LoRA), respectively.
```

This guide shows how to perform inference with TCD-LoRAs for 
- text-to-image
- inpainting
- community models
- style LoRA
- ControlNet
- IP-Adapter
- AnimateDiff

> TCD-LoRA can be considered an advanced method compared with [LCM-LoRA](https://latent-consistency-models.github.io/). The guide of TCD-LoRA workflow is:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
TCD-LoRA can be considered an advanced method compared with [LCM-LoRA](https://huggingface.co/docs/diffusers/main/en/using-diffusers/inference_with_lcm_lora). The guide of TCD-LoRA workflow is:
```

- Set the scheduler to [`TCDScheduler`].
- Load the TCD-LoRA weights for the model.
- Set the `num_inference_steps` between [4, 50].
- Set `eta` from [0, 1]. Larger `eta` in [`TCDScheduler`] will lead to blurrier images.
- Perform inference with the pipeline with the usual parameters.

Let's look at how we can perform inference with TCD-LoRAs for different tasks.

First, make sure you have [peft](https://github.com/huggingface/peft) installed, for better LoRA support.

```bash
pip install -U peft
```

## Text-to-image

You can use the [`StableDiffusionXLPipeline`] with the scheduler: [`TCDScheduler`] and then load the TCD-LoRA. Together with the TCD-LoRA and the TCDScheduler, the pipeline enables a fast inference workflow with high quality outputs.

```python
import torch
from diffusers import StableDiffusionXLPipeline, TCDScheduler

device = "cuda"
base_model_id = "stabilityai/stable-diffusion-xl-base-1.0"
tcd_lora_id = "h1t/TCD-SDXL-LoRA"

pipe = StableDiffusionXLPipeline.from_pretrained(base_model_id, torch_dtype=torch.float16, variant="fp16").to(device)
pipe.scheduler = TCDScheduler.from_config(pipe.scheduler.config)

pipe.load_lora_weights(tcd_lora_id)
pipe.fuse_lora()

> prompt = "Beautiful woman, bubblegum pink, lemon yellow, minty blue, futuristic, high-detail, epic composition, watercolor."

Reviewer: Could we try to make use of non-human characters? Since it's the official documentation, I am slightly concerned about the reception of this. 

WDYT? @yiyixuxu @stevhliu

Author: Let's replace it with a cute cat.

Reviewer: Yeah works for me. Could you generate the results for those as well?

Author: For [animagine-xl-3.0](https://huggingface.co/cagliostrolab/animagine-xl-3.0) and IP-Adapter, the human characters is performing better. Do we need to forcefully replace these?

Reviewer: I will let @stevhliu comment further here.

Reviewer 2: Should be ok for this example 👍

image = pipe(
    prompt=prompt,
    num_inference_steps=4,
    guidance_scale=0,
    eta=0.3, 
    generator=torch.Generator(device=device).manual_seed(0),
).images[0]
```

![](https://github.com/jabir-zheng/TCD/raw/main/assets/t2i_tcd.png)

> <Tip>
> Eta (referred to as `gamma` in the paper) is used to control the stochasticity in every step.
> A value of 0.3 often yields good results, where eta = 0 means determinstic and eta = 1 is identity to Multi-step Consistency Sampler (as well as LCMScheduler).
> We recommend using a higher eta when increasing the number of inference steps.
> </Tip>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<Tip>

Eta (referred to as `gamma` in the paper) is used to control the stochasticity in every step.
A value of 0.3 often yields good results, where eta = 0 means determinstic and eta = 1 is identity to Multi-step Consistency Sampler (as well as LCMScheduler).
We recommend using a higher eta when increasing the number of inference steps.

</Tip>
```

## TCD-LoRA is Versatile for Community Models

> As mentioned above, the TCD-LoRA is versatile for community models and plugins. We initially demonstrate the results with  a community fine-tuned base model [animagine-xl-3.0](https://huggingface.co/cagliostrolab/animagine-xl-3.0).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As mentioned above, the TCD-LoRA is versatile for community models and plugins. To test-drive this, load a community fine-tuned base model [animagine-xl-3.0](https://huggingface.co/cagliostrolab/animagine-xl-3.0).
```

```python
import torch
from diffusers import StableDiffusionXLPipeline, TCDScheduler

device = "cuda"
base_model_id = "cagliostrolab/animagine-xl-3.0"
tcd_lora_id = "h1t/TCD-SDXL-LoRA"

pipe = StableDiffusionXLPipeline.from_pretrained(base_model_id, torch_dtype=torch.float16, variant="fp16").to(device)
pipe.scheduler = TCDScheduler.from_config(pipe.scheduler.config)

pipe.load_lora_weights(tcd_lora_id)
pipe.fuse_lora()

prompt = "A man, clad in a meticulously tailored military uniform, stands with unwavering resolve. The uniform boasts intricate details, and his eyes gleam with determination. Strands of vibrant, windswept hair peek out from beneath the brim of his cap."

image = pipe(
    prompt=prompt,
    num_inference_steps=8,
    guidance_scale=0,
    eta=0.3, 
    generator=torch.Generator(device=device).manual_seed(0),
).images[0]
```

![](https://github.com/jabir-zheng/TCD/raw/main/assets/animagine_xl.png)

> Furthermore, TCD-LoRA also support other style LoRA. Here is an example with [Papercut](https://huggingface.co/TheLastBen/Papercut_SDXL). To learn more about how to combine LoRAs, refer to [this guide](https://huggingface.co/docs/diffusers/tutorials/using_peft_for_inference#combine-multiple-adapters).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Furthermore, TCD-LoRA also supports LoRAs corresponding to other styles. Below is an example with [Papercut](https://huggingface.co/TheLastBen/Papercut_SDXL). To learn more about how to combine LoRAs, refer to [this guide](https://huggingface.co/docs/diffusers/tutorials/using_peft_for_inference#combine-multiple-adapters).
```

pipe.scheduler = TCDScheduler.from_config(pipe.scheduler.config)

pipe.load_lora_weights(tcd_lora_id)
pipe.fuse_lora()

img_url = "https://raw.githubusercontent.com/CompVis/latent-diffusion/main/data/inpainting_examples/overture-creations-5sI6fQgYIuo.png"
mask_url = "https://raw.githubusercontent.com/CompVis/latent-diffusion/main/data/inpainting_examples/overture-creations-5sI6fQgYIuo_mask.png"

init_image = load_image(img_url).resize((1024, 1024))
mask_image = load_image(mask_url).resize((1024, 1024))

prompt = "a tiger sitting on a park bench"

image = pipe(
  prompt=prompt,
  image=init_image,
  mask_image=mask_image,
  num_inference_steps=8,
  guidance_scale=0,
  eta=0.3, # Eta (referred to as `gamma` in the paper) is used to control the stochasticity in every step. A value of 0.3 often yields good results.
  strength=0.99,  # make sure to use `strength` below 1.0
  generator=torch.Generator(device=device).manual_seed(0),
).images[0]

grid_image = make_image_grid([init_image, mask_image, image], rows=1, cols=3)
```

![](https://github.com/jabir-zheng/TCD/raw/main/assets/inpainting_tcd.png)

## Compatibility with ControlNet

> For this example, we'll keep using the SDXL model and the TCD-LoRA for SDXL with depth and canny ControlNet.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For this example, you'll keep using the SDXL model and the TCD-LoRA for SDXL with depth and canny ControlNets.
```

<!--Copyright 2024 The HuggingFace Team. All rights reserved.

Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the "License"); you may not use this file except in compliance with
the License. You may obtain a copy of the License at

http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0

Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software distributed under the License is distributed on
an "AS IS" BASIS, WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied. See the License for the
specific language governing permissions and limitations under the License.
-->

[[open-in-colab]]

# Performing inference with TCD-LoRA

> Trajecotroy Consistency Distillation (TCD) enables the model to generate higher quality, more detailed images with fewer steps. Additionally, TCD demonstrates superior performance even under conditions of high NFEs.

Author: To avoid confusion with `NFE`, I have continued with the description as  `the inference step`.

```bash
pip install -U peft
```

## Text-to-image

You can use the [`StableDiffusionXLPipeline`] with the scheduler: [`TCDScheduler`] and then load the TCD-LoRA. Together with the TCD-LoRA and the TCDScheduler, the pipeline enables a fast inference workflow with high quality outputs.

```python
import torch
from diffusers import StableDiffusionXLPipeline, TCDScheduler

device = "cuda"
base_model_id = "stabilityai/stable-diffusion-xl-base-1.0"
tcd_lora_id = "h1t/TCD-SDXL-LoRA"

pipe = StableDiffusionXLPipeline.from_pretrained(base_model_id, torch_dtype=torch.float16, variant="fp16").to(device)
pipe.scheduler = TCDScheduler.from_config(pipe.scheduler.config)

pipe.load_lora_weights(tcd_lora_id)
pipe.fuse_lora()

prompt = "Painting of the orange cat Otto von Garfield, Count of Bismarck-Schönhausen, Duke of Lauenburg, Minister-President of Prussia. Depicted wearing a Prussian Pickelhaube and eating his favorite meal - lasagna."

image = pipe(
    prompt=prompt,
    num_inference_steps=4,
    guidance_scale=0,
    eta=0.3, 
    generator=torch.Generator(device=device).manual_seed(0),
).images[0]
```

![](https://github.com/jabir-zheng/TCD/raw/main/assets/demo_image.png)

> <Tip>
> 
> Eta (referred to as `gamma` in the paper) is used to control the stochasticity in every step.
> A value of 0.3 often yields good results, where eta = 0 means determinstic and eta = 1 is identity to Multi-step Consistency Sampler (as well as LCMScheduler).
> We recommend using a higher eta when increasing the number of inference steps.
> 
> </Tip>

Reviewer 2: Better to have the tips upfront where users get the full picture before running the code

```suggestion
```

> ## TCD-LoRA is Versatile for Community Models

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Community models
```

> As mentioned above, the TCD-LoRA is versatile for community models and plugins. To test-drive this, load a community fine-tuned base model [animagine-xl-3.0](https://huggingface.co/cagliostrolab/animagine-xl-3.0).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
TCD-LoRA also works with many community finetuned models and plugins. For example, load the [animagine-xl-3.0](https://huggingface.co/cagliostrolab/animagine-xl-3.0) checkpoint which is a community finetuned version of SDXL for generating anime images.
```

```python
import torch
from diffusers import StableDiffusionXLPipeline, TCDScheduler

device = "cuda"
base_model_id = "cagliostrolab/animagine-xl-3.0"
tcd_lora_id = "h1t/TCD-SDXL-LoRA"

pipe = StableDiffusionXLPipeline.from_pretrained(base_model_id, torch_dtype=torch.float16, variant="fp16").to(device)
pipe.scheduler = TCDScheduler.from_config(pipe.scheduler.config)

pipe.load_lora_weights(tcd_lora_id)
pipe.fuse_lora()

prompt = "A man, clad in a meticulously tailored military uniform, stands with unwavering resolve. The uniform boasts intricate details, and his eyes gleam with determination. Strands of vibrant, windswept hair peek out from beneath the brim of his cap."

image = pipe(
    prompt=prompt,
    num_inference_steps=8,
    guidance_scale=0,
    eta=0.3, 
    generator=torch.Generator(device=device).manual_seed(0),
).images[0]
```

![](https://github.com/jabir-zheng/TCD/raw/main/assets/animagine_xl.png)

> Furthermore, TCD-LoRA also supports LoRAs corresponding to other styles. Below is an example with [Papercut](https://huggingface.co/TheLastBen/Papercut_SDXL). To learn more about how to combine LoRAs, refer to [this guide](https://huggingface.co/docs/diffusers/tutorials/using_peft_for_inference#combine-multiple-adapters).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
TCD-LoRA also supports other LoRAs trained on different styles. For example, let's load the [TheLastBen/Papercut_SDXL](https://huggingface.co/TheLastBen/Papercut_SDXL) LoRA and fuse it with the TCD-LoRA with the [`~loaders.UNet2DConditionLoadersMixin.set_adapters`] method. 

> [!TIP]
> Check out the [Merge LoRAs](merge_loras) guide to learn more about efficient merging methods.
```

```python
import torch
from diffusers import StableDiffusionXLPipeline
from scheduling_tcd import TCDScheduler 

device = "cuda"
base_model_id = "stabilityai/stable-diffusion-xl-base-1.0"
tcd_lora_id = "h1t/TCD-SDXL-LoRA"
styled_lora_id = "TheLastBen/Papercut_SDXL"

pipe = StableDiffusionXLPipeline.from_pretrained(base_model_id, torch_dtype=torch.float16, variant="fp16").to(device)
pipe.scheduler = TCDScheduler.from_config(pipe.scheduler.config)

pipe.load_lora_weights(tcd_lora_id, adapter_name="tcd")
pipe.load_lora_weights(styled_lora_id, adapter_name="style")
pipe.set_adapters(["tcd", "style"], adapter_weights=[1.0, 1.0])

prompt = "papercut of a winter mountain, snow"

image = pipe(
    prompt=prompt,
    num_inference_steps=4,
    guidance_scale=0,
    eta=0.3, 
    generator=torch.Generator(device=device).manual_seed(0),
).images[0]
```

![](https://github.com/jabir-zheng/TCD/raw/main/assets/styled_lora.png)

> ## Inpainting with TCD 

Reviewer 2: Looks like this section hasn't been moved yet! Take a look at my suggestion above :)

> ## Inpainting with TCD 

Author: Just moved it as a subtag of general task. ;)

pipe.scheduler = TCDScheduler.from_config(pipe.scheduler.config)

pipe.load_lora_weights(tcd_lora_id)
pipe.fuse_lora()

img_url = "https://raw.githubusercontent.com/CompVis/latent-diffusion/main/data/inpainting_examples/overture-creations-5sI6fQgYIuo.png"
mask_url = "https://raw.githubusercontent.com/CompVis/latent-diffusion/main/data/inpainting_examples/overture-creations-5sI6fQgYIuo_mask.png"

init_image = load_image(img_url).resize((1024, 1024))
mask_image = load_image(mask_url).resize((1024, 1024))

prompt = "a tiger sitting on a park bench"

image = pipe(
  prompt=prompt,
  image=init_image,
  mask_image=mask_image,
  num_inference_steps=8,
  guidance_scale=0,
  eta=0.3, # Eta (referred to as `gamma` in the paper) is used to control the stochasticity in every step. A value of 0.3 often yields good results.
  strength=0.99,  # make sure to use `strength` below 1.0
  generator=torch.Generator(device=device).manual_seed(0),
).images[0]

grid_image = make_image_grid([init_image, mask_image, image], rows=1, cols=3)
```

![](https://github.com/jabir-zheng/TCD/raw/main/assets/inpainting_tcd.png)

> ## Compatibility with ControlNet

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Adapters
```

> For this example, you'll keep using the SDXL model and the TCD-LoRA for SDXL with depth and canny ControlNets.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
TCD-LoRA is very versatile, and it can be combined with other adapter types like ControlNets, IP-Adapter, and AnimateDiff.
```

> ### Depth ControlNet

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
<hfoptions id="adapters">
<hfoption id="ControlNet">
```

    controlnet=controlnet,
    torch_dtype=torch.float16,
    variant="fp16",
).to(device)
pipe.enable_model_cpu_offload()

pipe.scheduler = TCDScheduler.from_config(pipe.scheduler.config)

pipe.load_lora_weights(tcd_lora_id)
pipe.fuse_lora()

prompt = "ultrarealistic shot of a furry blue bird"

canny_image = load_image("https://huggingface.co/datasets/hf-internal-testing/diffusers-images/resolve/main/sd_controlnet/bird_canny.png")

controlnet_conditioning_scale = 0.5  # recommended for good generalization

image = pipe(
    prompt, 
    image=canny_image, 
    num_inference_steps=4, 
    guidance_scale=0,
    eta=0.3,
    controlnet_conditioning_scale=controlnet_conditioning_scale,
    generator=torch.Generator(device=device).manual_seed(0),
).images[0]

grid_image = make_image_grid([canny_image, image], rows=1, cols=2)
```
![](https://github.com/jabir-zheng/TCD/raw/main/assets/controlnet_canny_tcd.png)

<Tip>
The inference parameters in this example might not work for all examples, so we recommend you to try different values for `num_inference_steps`, `guidance_scale`, `controlnet_conditioning_scale` and `cross_attention_kwargs` parameters and choose the best one. 
</Tip>

> ## IP-Adapter

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
</hfoption>
<hfoption id="IP-Adapter">
```

from diffusers.utils import load_image, make_image_grid

from ip_adapter import IPAdapterXL
from scheduling_tcd import TCDScheduler 

device = "cuda"
base_model_path = "stabilityai/stable-diffusion-xl-base-1.0"
image_encoder_path = "sdxl_models/image_encoder"
ip_ckpt = "sdxl_models/ip-adapter_sdxl.bin"
tcd_lora_id = "h1t/TCD-SDXL-LoRA"

pipe = StableDiffusionXLPipeline.from_pretrained(
    base_model_path, 
    torch_dtype=torch.float16, 
    variant="fp16"
)
pipe.scheduler = TCDScheduler.from_config(pipe.scheduler.config)

pipe.load_lora_weights(tcd_lora_id)
pipe.fuse_lora()

ip_model = IPAdapterXL(pipe, image_encoder_path, ip_ckpt, device)

ref_image = load_image("https://raw.githubusercontent.com/tencent-ailab/IP-Adapter/main/assets/images/woman.png").resize((512, 512))

prompt = "best quality, high quality, wearing sunglasses"

image = ip_model.generate(
    pil_image=ref_image, 
    prompt=prompt,
    scale=0.5,
    num_samples=1, 
    num_inference_steps=4, 
    guidance_scale=0,
    eta=0.3, 
    seed=0,
)[0]

grid_image = make_image_grid([ref_image, image], rows=1, cols=2)
```

![](https://github.com/jabir-zheng/TCD/raw/main/assets/ip_adapter.png)

> ## AnimateDiff

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
</hfoption>
<hfoption id="AnimateDiff">
```

```python
import torch
from diffusers import MotionAdapter, AnimateDiffPipeline, DDIMScheduler
from scheduling_tcd import TCDScheduler
from diffusers.utils import export_to_gif

adapter = MotionAdapter.from_pretrained("guoyww/animatediff-motion-adapter-v1-5")
pipe = AnimateDiffPipeline.from_pretrained(
    "frankjoshua/toonyou_beta6",
    motion_adapter=adapter,
).to("cuda")

# set TCDScheduler
pipe.scheduler = TCDScheduler.from_config(pipe.scheduler.config)

# load TCD LoRA
pipe.load_lora_weights("h1t/TCD-SD15-LoRA", adapter_name="tcd")
pipe.load_lora_weights("guoyww/animatediff-motion-lora-zoom-in", weight_name="diffusion_pytorch_model.safetensors", adapter_name="motion-lora")

pipe.set_adapters(["tcd", "motion-lora"], adapter_weights=[1.0, 1.2])

prompt = "best quality, masterpiece, 1girl, looking at viewer, blurry background, upper body, contemporary, dress"
generator = torch.manual_seed(0)
frames = pipe(
    prompt=prompt,
    num_inference_steps=5,
    guidance_scale=0,
    cross_attention_kwargs={"scale": 1},
    num_frames=24,
    eta=0.3,
    generator=generator
).frames[0]
export_to_gif(frames, "animation.gif")
```

> ![](https://github.com/jabir-zheng/TCD/raw/main/assets/animation_example.gif)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
![](https://github.com/jabir-zheng/TCD/raw/main/assets/animation_example.gif)

</hfoption>
</hfoptions>
```
